# Climate-Migration
Analyzes heterogeneity among individual migration decisions in response to climate risk

Motivation

  Globally, the World Bank expects climate change to be one of the main drivers of internal migration, especially in developing regions, causing as many as 216 million people to move within their own countries.1 Such a massive relocation of people can reshape the demographic, social and cultural dynamics of places over time. However, despite the attention paid to migration following natural disasters,5, 9 less is known about individuals’ migration decisions in anticipation of future climate shocks. This may cause increased migration into areas such as the traditionally working-class neighborhoods in east L.A., as people from the west escape sea level rise and people from the south escape wildfires. Such in-migration could displace certain individuals out of low-risk tracts. Indeed, over the last few decades, there has been an agglomeration of people and economic activity into high-risk areas,3 and high climate-risk counties have grown about 2.9 log points more, per decade, than low-risk counties.4 Yet, as hypothesized by Behrer & Bolotnyy (2020), negligible population change in low-risk tracts may be because different individuals are moving into and out of those tracts at the same time. 
Therefore, my research question is: to what extent do migration decisions in response to climate risk differ across individual characteristics? Understanding how the composition of low and high-risk areas is changing is crucial for understanding the distribution of impacts of future weather-related catastrophes, as it may explain the unequal impact of disasters. For instance, damages from Hurricane Katrina were disproportionately borne by the African-American community,2 and damaged neighborhoods were more likely to gentrify in the following ten years.11 Alongside the fact that hurricane-prone areas have grown 84% from 1980-2006, compared to 70% in the U.S. overall and 64% in non-coastal areas,6 begs the question of whether hurricane-prone areas have seen a disproportionate increase in the minority population over the same period. Yet, while gentrification – where poor urban areas see an influx of affluent residents and investments that often displace incumbent residents – has long been studied, research on ‘climate gentrification’ is relatively undeveloped. By unmasking heterogenous individual sensitivities to climate risk, I will also identify if in-migration into high-risk tracts is triggered by displacement of residents from low-risk areas, for instance due to increased housing and rent prices.

Data

  To study the characteristics of migration decisions of individuals, I will use the Consumer Credit Panel (CCP). The CCP is a five percent random sample of the credit histories maintained by Equifax, which, in addition to a variety of individual attributes, reports the census block for over 12 million individuals each quarter. Extant literature focuses on a single hazard,5,9 but for the main independent variable, I will create a net composite climate index ranging from 0 to 100 using the National Risk Index (NRI) from FEMA, which combines the expected annual losses for 18 different hazards (gross risk) and the area’s social vulnerability and community resilience (similar to Indaco & Ortega’s (2024) index). Then, for each year in 1990-2020, I will classify low, medium and high-risk tracts as those below the 25th percentile, between the 25th and 75th percentile, or above the 75th percentile, respectively. Moreover, out-migration trends may be catalyzed (and in-migration trends subdued) if a tract has restrictive zoning regulations that impede new housing construction. For instance, restrictive land-use regulations in San Diego raise rents by an average 28% and explain 7% of residents living in fire-prone areas.7 Yet, climate migration literature largely ignores the impact of zoning. Therefore, I will use the Wharton Land Use regulation index – a composite measure that accounts for density and developer restrictions, annual caps on new housing supply, and if a town meeting is required to approve a proposed residential project – to create a dummy variable for whether a tract has restrictive zoning regulations in year t, similar to Krimmel et al (2021).

Methodology

  I will estimate an ordered logit model for each decade in the period 1990-2020. The dependent variable takes three order values based on observed migration between t and t+10 (where t=1990,2000, or 2010) and the climate risk of census tract c in year t. The dependent variable takes a value of -1 if the individual moves from a lower to a higher-risk tract, a value of 0 if the risk of their tract does not change, and a value of 1 if the individual moves from a lower to higher-risk tract. The model to be estimated is:
  
 P(Y_i=m)=β_0+β_z Z_(c,t)+β_(w,c) (W_(c,t))+β_(f,i) 〖(F〗_(i,t))+β_fw (W_(c,t)×F_(i,t))+ε_(i,t)
 
Where c is the individuals’ tract of residence at year t, m is one of the possible outcomes (-1, 0, or 1) and  is a dummy variable for whether a tract has restrictive zoning regulations (a positive coefficient means restrictiveness magnifies migration to high-risk tracts). The vector  represents sensitivities of migration decisions to factors such as age, race, income, credit score, and a dummy variable for low-income status (as the financial strain of house and rent price effects may be felt more acutely by those with low income or credit scores). For instance, if gentrification forces are at play, I expect a positive coefficient for the low-income variable. Moreover, I will interact all tract-level controls  and individual controls as factors affecting migration may vary by individual attributes (such as if people move to high-risk tracts as they age but this is less true for low-income individuals with less financial freedom to move). The main specification could also be estimated separately for each year in the sample to evaluate if migration sensitivities of certain attributes have meaningfully changed over time.

Conclusion

  Natural disasters depress local economies, leading to lower labor productivity, labor demand, housing prices and rents; and increased poverty.8 Therefore, identifying how the demographics of high-risk areas evolve over time, and if low-income individuals systematically migrate into high-risk areas, is essential to understanding whether climate is exacerbating the persistence of intergenerational poverty. Moreover, if high-risk places experience a brain-drain as more-educated and affluent residents flee to low-risk tracts, an increased demand for housing in these tracts may exacerbate housing affordability crises. In this vein, my results will shed light on individual sensitivities of internal migration flows to zoning restrictiveness, a topic of utmost importance to policymakers. Moreover, as climate migration is a worldwide phenomenon (in 2022, 84% of refugees and asylum seekers were from countries with high climate vulnerability)12, the systematic influx of climate migrants fleeing disasters in other countries could worsen the refugee crisis, further aggravating local outcomes such as availability of jobs and housing.
  The gradual nature of long-term climate migration effects makes quantifying such patterns challenging.  Most literature focuses on the extensive margin of changes in population levels,4 masking important compositional effects. Some literature examines the intensive margin: Behrer & Bolotnyy (2023) find that out-migration does not increase after hurricanes. However, individuals may respond to climate change in anticipation of future climate shocks. Moreover, much of the focus in climate literature is on the monetary costs of climate disasters. But, there are significant welfare costs associated with the migration of low-income people into high-risk areas, since financially unstable individuals have difficulty recovering from disasters. The net effect of a given disaster can also vary across areas with the same gross risk, reflecting infrastructure and community factors affecting their ability to recover from a climate shock. 


References

1. World Bank, 2021. “Climate change could force 216 million people to migrate within their own countries by 2050.” 2. John Logan, 2006. The impact of Katrina: Race and class in storm-damaged neighborhoods. 3. Adam Smith. “2023: A historic year of U.S. billion-dollar weather and climate disasters.” Climate.gov, 2024. 4. Indaco & Ortega, 2024. Adapting to Climate Risk? Local Population Dynamics in the U.S. Economics of Disasters and Climate Change. 5. McConnell et al, 2021. “Effects of Wildfire Destruction on Migration, Consumer Credit, and Financial Distress.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 6. Fischetti & Wilson. “Coastline Population Trends in the U.S: 1960 to 2008.” U.S. Census Bureau, 2010. 7. Augusto Ospital, 2023. Urban Policy and Spatial Exposure to Environmental Risk. 8. Boustan et al, 2020. The effect of natural disasters on economic activity in U.S. counties: A century of data. Journal of Urban Economics. 9. Behrer & Bolotnyy, 2023. Moving to Adaptation? Understanding the Migratory Response to Hurricanes in the U.S. 10. Gyourko, Hartley & Krimmel, 2021. The local residential land use regulatory environment across U.S. housing markets: Evidence from a new Wharton index. Journal of Urban Economics. 11. Eric Joseph van Holm & Christopher Wyczalkowski, 2019. "Gentrification in the wake of a hurricane: New Orleans after Katrina," Urban Studies. 12. United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 2024. “The climate crisis is amplifying displacement and making life harder for those already forced to flee.”


